Can you tell me a little bit about your mum?
She's always been an old lady. She was 41 when I was born and I've always been her carer
as far as I can remember. Her proper name was Fajga Jekyll.
Yeah.
Although she was known as Fanny Jekyll.
And she was born around when?
25th November 1917.
Okay, and where?
Dolina, Poland as was then.
Okay. Can you tell me a little bit about her life then?
As far as I know, when she was a baby they moved to Gelsenkirchen, which is near in
the Westphalen of Germany. She was about two, three I think. She was brought up there and she had
a brother and two sisters and I think other children but I'm not sure about the other
children. And then they had a local synagogue not far from where they lived in Gelsenkirchen.
And then war broke out and she escaped a roundup. Her sisters were already in the UK then.
But her brother and parents weren't. She escaped a roundup but eventually she got caught and as
far as I know she was taken to a labour camp. And I don't know when she was rounded up but she was
taken to a labour camp and worked and they were marching from one place to another and she tripped
and the guard hit her on the head with his rifle butt and left her for dead and carried on marching.
And apparently a Lutheran priest found her and thought she was also dead but she wasn't and he
brought her back to, nursed her back to life. All I know is she had an indentation in the inside of
her arm where she had the tattoo numbers taken away. I mean they wasn't lasered out, they were
sort of dug out because she had quite a deep hole in her arm. She had a big, big scar in her head
always from the rifle butt where she was hit. She was left injured and somehow this priest
and the underground got her through and got to the UK and that's as far as I know really.
And how was her health? Always bad, always bad, bad health, always as I said right in the beginning
I've always known her as a ill mother. I've never known her as a healthy mother. She was completely
deaf, yeah they made her completely deaf and it got worse over the years. Yeah I think in the early
days she used to wear a hearing aid and she could hear slightly but then even with the hearing aid
she couldn't hear anymore so she just left it off but and she couldn't hear the English language to
pronounce it so she spoke to us in German. My father spoke to us in English and we was brought
up bilingual. You said her sisters got out? Her sisters came out before all hell let loose type
thing you know and they came over here and they were in service her two sisters because she was
the younger one. I suppose she was too young to go with them I don't know. She was the younger one
and yeah they were in service over in London, domestic service. And do you have any information
about what happened about her parents? Well we found out a couple of years ago that they were taken
to Latvia and killed in Latvia. So she got out somehow through the underground system? Through
the underground system she never spoke about it never mentioned it. Where did she end up in the UK
then? In a place in a refugee camp called Kitchener Camp and I think she was there for about 18 months
two years something like that and that's where she met my dad who was in the forces
who was a German speaker in the forces that's where they got married in the Kitchener Camp.
Did she talk about her time in the Kitchener Camp? No no never spoke about anything. A lot of this is
what you've reconstructed. Yeah.